Recommendations

International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Sector

Recommendation ITU-R P.525-5
(11/2024)
P Series: Radiowave propagation
Calculation of free-space attenuation

ii

Rec. ITU-R P.525-5

Foreword
The role of the Radiocommunication Sector is to ensure the rational, equitable, efficient and economical use of the radiofrequency spectrum by all radiocommunication services, including satellite services, and carry out studies without limit of frequency range on the basis of which Recommendations are adopted.
The regulatory and policy functions of the Radiocommunication Sector are performed by World and Regional Radiocommunication Conferences and Radiocommunication Assemblies supported by Study Groups.

Policy on Intellectual Property Right (IPR)
ITU-R policy on IPR is described in the Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC referenced in Resolution ITU-R 1. Forms to be used for the submission of patent statements and licensing declarations by patent holders are available from http://www.itu.int/ITU-R/go/patents/en where the Guidelines for Implementation of the Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC and the ITU-R patent information database can also be found.

Series
BO BR BS BT F M P RA RS S SA SF SM SNG TF V

Series of ITU-R Recommendations
(Also available online at https://www.itu.int/publ/R-REC/en)
Title
Satellite delivery Recording for production, archival and play-out; film for television Broadcasting service (sound) Broadcasting service (television) Fixed service Mobile, radiodetermination, amateur and related satellite services Radiowave propagation Radio astronomy Remote sensing systems Fixed-satellite service Space applications and meteorology Frequency sharing and coordination between fixed-satellite and fixed service systems Spectrum management Satellite news gathering Time signals and frequency standards emissions Vocabulary and related subjects

Note: This ITU-R Recommendation was approved in English under the procedure detailed in Resolution ITU-R 1.
Electronic Publication Geneva, 2024
© ITU 2024
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without written permission of ITU.

Rec. ITU-R P.525-5

1

RECOMMENDATION ITU-R P.525-5
Calculation of free-space attenuation
(1978-1982-1994-2016-2019-2024)
Scope This Recommendation provides methods to calculate the attenuation in free space.

Keywords Free space, attenuation, telecommunication links Related ITU Recommendations
Recommendation ITU-R P.341 Recommendation ITU-R P.368
NOTE ­ In every case the latest edition of the Recommendation in force should be used.
The ITU Radiocommunication Assembly, considering
that free-space propagation is a fundamental reference for radio-engineering, recommends
that the methods in the Annex should be used for the calculation of attenuation in free space.

Annex

1

Introduction

For the purposes of radiocommunication, free space is defined as a perfect vacuum which may be considered of infinite extent in all directions, so that free space propagation is the propagation of a radio wave radiating in free space1.

As free-space propagation is often used as a reference in other texts, this Annex presents relevant formulae.

1 The International Standards Organisation in its electrotechnical vocabulary (electropedia) has a more general definition:
Free space propagation: propagation of an electromagnetic wave in a homogeneous ideal dielectric medium which may be considered of infinite extent in all directions
NOTE ­ For propagation in free space, the magnitude of each vector of the electromagnetic field in any given direction from the source is proportional to the reciprocal of the distance from the source beyond a distance determined by the size of the source and the wavelength.

2

Rec. ITU-R P.525-5

2

Basic formulae for telecommunication links

Free-space propagation may be calculated in different ways, each of which is adapted to a particular type of service.

2.1 Point-to-area links

If there is a transmitter serving several randomly-distributed receivers (broadcasting, mobile service), the electric field is calculated at a point located at some appropriate distance from the transmitter by the expression:

 = 30


(1)

where:

e : r.m.s. field strength (V/m) (see Note 1)

p : equivalent isotropically radiated power (e.i.r.p.) of the transmitter in the direction of the point in question (W) (see Note 2)

d : distance from the transmitter to the point in question (m).

Equation (1) is often replaced by equation (2) which uses practical units:

where:

mV/m

=

173

kW km

(2)

emV/m : r.m.s field strength (mV/m)
pkW : equivalent isotropically radiated power (e.i.r.p.) of the transmitter in the direction of the point in question (kW)

dkm : distance from the transmitter to the point in question (km).

For antennas operating in free-space conditions the cymomotive force may be obtained by multiplying together e and d in equation (1). Its dimension is volts.

NOTE 1 ­ If the wave is elliptically polarized and not linear, and if the electric field components along two

orthogonal axes are expressed by ex and ey, the left-hand term of equation (1) should be replaced by

e

2 x

+

e

2 y

.

ex and ey can be deduced only if the axial ratio is known. e should be replaced by e 2 in the case of circular polarization.

NOTE 2 ­ In the case of antennas located at ground level (typically at relatively low frequencies) with vertical polarization, radiation is generally considered only in the upper half-space. When the ground is assumed to be plane and perfectly conducting, the power flux-density for a given radiated power is doubled, as compared with an antenna in free space. (Alternatively, when considering field strengths, the field strength is similarly increased by 3 dB.) This should be taken into account in determining the radiated power (and is already included in Recommendation ITU-R P.368 and in Annex 3 to Recommendation ITU-R P.341).

2.2 Relations between the characteristics of a plane wave

There are also relations between the characteristics of a plane wave (or a wave which can be treated as a plane wave) at a point:

 = 2 =
120

30 1202

=



×

1 42

(3)

where:

s : power flux-density (W/m2)

e : r.m.s. field strength (V/m)

Rec. ITU-R P.525-5

3

p : equivalent isotropically radiated power (e.i.r.p.) of the transmitter in the direction of the point in question (W).

2.3 Point-to-point links

For a point-to-point link between isotropic antennas, it is necessary to consider the power at the output

of the receiving isotropic antenna  at the point in question:



=



×



=

 42

×

2 ,
4

(4)

where:

: effective aperture of a receiving isotropic antenna (m2).

Introducing free-space attenuation between isotropic antennas, also known as the free-space basic transmission loss (symbols: Lbf or Abf), it can be calculated as follows (see Recommendation ITU-R P.341):



=

-10 log10

(412

×

2 )
4

=

20 log10

(4)


dB

(5)

where:

Lbf : free-space basic transmission loss (dB) d : distance

 : wavelength, and

d and  are expressed in the same unit.

Equation (5) can also be written using the frequency instead of the wavelength.

 = 32.4 + 20 log10  + 20 log10 

dB

(6)

where:

f : frequency (MHz)

d : distance (km).

3

The free-space basic transmission loss for a radar system (symbols: Lbr or Abr)

Radar systems represent a special case because the signal is subjected to a loss while propagating both from the transmitter to the target and from the target to the receiver. For radars using a common antenna for both transmitter and receiver, a radar free-space basic transmission loss, Lbr, can be written as follows:

 = 103.4 + 20 log10  + 40 log10  - 10 log10 

dB

(7)

where:

 : radar target cross-section (m2)

d : distance from the radar to the target (km)

f : frequency of the system (MHz).

The radar target cross-section of an object is the ratio of the total isotropically equivalent scattered power to the incident power density.

4

Rec. ITU-R P.525-5

4

Conversion formulae

On the basis of free-space propagation, the following conversion formulae may be used.

Field strength for a given isotropically transmitted power:

 =  - 20 log10  + 74.8

(8)

Available power received through a conjugately matched isotropic receiving antenna for a given field strength:

 =  - 20 log10  - 167.2

(9)

Free-space basic transmission loss for a given isotropically transmitted power and field strength:

 =  -  + 20 log10  + 167.2

dB

(10)

Power flux-density for a given field strength:

 =  - 145.8

(11)

where:

Pt : isotropically transmitted power (dB(W)) Pr : available power received through a conjugately matched antenna (dB(W)) E : electric field strength (dB(V/m))
f : frequency (GHz) d : radio path length (km) Lbf : free-space basic transmission loss (dB) S : power flux-density (dB(W/m2)).

Note that equations (8) and (10) can be used to derive equation (6).

